# In Defence of offence and offence

{"Author": "Joshua Loo", "Date": "28.4.17", "Category": "Dialectic", "Tags": ("Freedom of speech", "Offence")}

Freedom exists in several different ways. Perhaps the two most important dimensions of freedom of speech are first, the freedom to make certain claims without restriction, and second, the ability to make these claims where and when one wishes. As a reaction to tragedy, some choose to close themselves off. This is entirely legitimate insofar as it only affects the individuals who choose to do so. At the point at which it begins to affect others, it often becomes illegitimate, counter-productive and coercive itself.  This article contains two defences: first, one of offensive material, not in an intellectual sense but rather an attack on state or communal attempts at censorship, and second, a defence of the offence which is taken when such statements are made, and measures to restrict where and when speech acts take place.

### Restrictions on what is said

Most defences of offence rely in some way on their being a benefit to truth. Mill offers a three-pronged defence which has become conventionally cited. This subject has already been analysed in some depth, both within the school and without. Broadly speaking it is probably the case that most forms of freedom of speech increase liberal views because they are right - because we shouldn’t regulate what people do in their beds, we shouldn’t jail people for putting things into their body or other victimless crimes, and we shouldn’t force people into traditional familial institutions if they don’t want to take part. It’s also intuitively the case that if one is unprepared to defend a view, one probably ought not to hold that view in the first place.

More interesting is the status granted to speech - its distinctiveness - and what this means in relation to offence. Societies (should) prohibit violence not solely (or, indeed, not at all) because violence is undesirable, but also because it contains a coercive element which in turn permits coercive action to be taken against it - it is distinct to other undesirable actions, like smoking, or poor taste. In its renunciation of others’ autonomy, violence combines with generally accepted principles of reciprocity, to indicate that its perpetrator does not deserve full autonomy anymore. In speech, the physical act is innocuous. The communication of an idea is seen as harmful.

Speech is different to violence in several key respects. First, it is often a voluntary act to listen to speech. One is rarely forced to listen to speech. Even when one is in its physical proximity, one does not have to particularly engage with the syllables entering their ears, and can ignore what is being said. This contrasts with violence, which, if not attempted by incompetents, is involuntary. Ergo the idea itself is not per se impermissible.

Second, it occurs on a different plane to that which violence occurs. It is often suggested speech itself can be violent; if it is conceptually violent, the paragraph above provides an adequate response, otherwise it must contain overt references to violence, which, in themselves, can also be ignored, but, if delivered as a threat, are not immune to this criticism. It is at the point that speech contains a credible threat of violence that it becomes impermissible, because an individual must take precautions to deal with this possibility. Contrasting a lunatic complaining about an international conspiracy involving a religious group with a lunatic threatening to bomb their local place of worship, the former is indubitably wrong, and one would not say it, but it should not be punished, just as consenting adults smoking is wrong, but should not be punished, whereas the latter clearly is wrong, and ought to be punished, because the credible threat it delivers changes the lives of the others in an involuntary sense.

Although this somewhat blurs the line between speech and violence, what it does is it separates speech into the pure communication of an idea at an intellectual level and its consequences in the physical world. Just as it is a crime to murder someone by pressing a button, and not a defence to say, "I pressed a button - I didn’t kill the person", so too it ought to be a crime to cause physical involuntary disruption by saying something, but it is not a crime to simply express an idea. It is very rare that the expression of an idea’s inevitable concomitant is violence, so at the very least the standard at which speech should be punished is significantly higher, ie. the speech involved must be significantly worse, to merit such punishment.

Third, there is a distinction insofar as it is difficult to quantify acts in this plane. Although our methods of assessing violence are to some degree cruel, we all have a common frame of reference which is not entirely arbitrary by which we can assess different levels of violence - that’s why murder is punished more than punching someone without significantly injuring them. The problem with speech is that it is difficult to quantify the harm which is claimed to have occurred. This is because the only discriminant which we can palatably use is whether or not there has been a complaint. It is illegitimate of one to say that the harm that a Christian feels when they hear of abortion is better or worse to that of a victim of a hate crime listening to someone saying something racist, because we ourselves have not experienced this attack, and such emotions are fundamentally the products of internalised mental processes which we cannot understand fully. Telling the Christian that their experience does not matter is the same as telling someone suffering from the aftermath of a hate crime that their trauma doesn’t matter or isn’t real. This illegitimacy does not exist when we say that, using objective medical science, one person was less hurt than another. We therefore have only one binary test for speech acts.

With only one binary test for speech acts, it is the case that we must punish them all equally. Intuitively, the following is true. It would be absurd to prohibit all discussion, because, somewhere, the tragedy of circumstance has most likely caused someone to likely be genuinely affected by such discussion, whether by being triggered or otherwise. Similarly, so too would it be to say that we should not speak of the cruelty of some religious practises because other religious people may be offended. We therefore cannot also prohibit offensive speech about sexual minorities or non-binary individuals, because the basis of offence is that it is arbitrary product of internalised processes.

Importantly, however, this doesn’t mean that everything should be permitted everywhere. In a crowded corridor, most forms of political speech in the form of leafleting should probably be prohibited, so that people can move. In a large public square with a history of public activism, this probably isn’t the case. What is shown above is that these restrictions must be view-agnostic - unlike restrictions on violence, where we might differentiate between types of violence, we cannot here, and so we must restrict not by the content of what is said but how, when and where it is to be said.

### Spaces

Freedom of speech consists not only of what is said but also the circumstances in which it is said. This is the justification for the distinction between shouting "fire" in a crowded theatre where there is no fire and shouting “fire” in a forest with no one to listen. The concept of spaces is important, because it means that not every single space must have the same restrictions or lack thereof, so a refinement of ideas about free speech is possible.

First, some spaces simply are inappropriate as venues for speech. Examples in which this is the case should be quite obvious. Primarily, they are areas which are not only resource-constrained but also areas through which many people pass and there is no clear alternative. The voluntary underpinnings of free speech’s unique characteristics evaporate if one is involuntarily subjected to a protest inside a train station through which one must go. If there’s another train station a hundred metres away, this objection gains less traction. Other spaces are more obviously appropriate for speech. Again, here, there ought to still be restrictions. Parliament Square ought to be significantly more freed up than it was under Blair; that doesn’t mean that there should be no restrictions - a booking system would help to prevent violence, producing very loud noises might disturb those commuting through Westminster station, and so on.

Second, spaces should be able to self-define. We can differentiate between spaces by the sorts of restrictions which can legitimately be imposed. In a society in which there is huge diversity of views, it’s not clear that governments ought to be able to restrict spaces in ways other than those view-agnostic. In a group dedicated to a particular cause, view-agnostic restrictions might be inappropriate. The only people directly affected by the speech inside a group are its members. If these members therefore decide to restrict certain views more than other views, this is an entirely legitimate choice. They are under no obligation to others’ trauma insofar as they are not affected.

Third, spaces which are meant to be intellectually agnostic cannot justifiably claim that certain views should be restricted because of their traumatising effect without being under an obligation to ban all discussion of heated topics. Here, again, there is a distinction between prohibiting its discussion, and prohibiting its discussion in a public area where people might have to walk through and listen to it. Given finite campus police resources, some speakers probably aren’t worth inviting. Given finite time, some probably shouldn’t speak anyway because of the lack of strength in their argument. If members agree collectively that broad representation is their aim, but this must occur within the constraints of resource limits, the logic above holds.

Fourth, institutions which are view-agnostic also should not have free reign over the restrictions that they impose on where, when and how speech occurs. At some point, free speech is largely meaningless if it means that one is confined to a "free speech area" many kilometres away from the event that one is protesting against. It also becomes meaningless if one must hold it at a ridiculous time, restrict the number of invitees or who listens, or imposes other unreasonable requirements. The problem is that it’s not clear how we can distinguish between reasonable and unreasonable requirements. Perhaps the most coherent view is that, given the latent risk of making free speech meaningless by overly restricting it, there ought to be a presumption in favour of freedom of speech, and only when a specific exemption is argued and secured based on previous principles (such as those in the first part of this essay) can something like this happen.

### Safe spaces, trigger warnings and no-platforming

With a more coherent framework in which free speech operates, we can ask ourselves about these innovations in free speech.

First, safe spaces are not an attack on free speech, *per se*. There is a distinction between unduly restricting discourse within an open forum, by taking it over, and creating a new space with other characteristics. The former is questionable, and is often undesirable, because it turns a space which claims broad representation into a non-view-agnostic space. This is similar to suggestions of censorship in the public space. The latter is not an attack in any way. Spaces can operate concurrently without affecting each other. Even if they do affect each other, this is often incidental, or voluntary. These externalities should not affect the fact that freedom of speech and association imply a freedom to partially define the constitutive attachments of a group. Even turning formerly non-safe spaces into safe spaces is not necessarily harmful. Some of these spaces were perhaps unnecessarily open - without public purpose and yet acting as if they do.

When the *New York Times* contributing op-ed writer Judith Shulevitz attacked the idea of safe spaces - *In College and Hiding From Scary Ideas* (March 21, 2015), what was missed is that people who are scared of these "scary ideas" aren’t going to talk about these ideas anyway, because they would have simply skipped such discussion. The conflation isn’t necessarily as egregious as it has been in other cases, but it relies on a slippery slope argument - "once you designate some spaces as safe, you imply that the rest are unsafe. It follows that they should be made safer". This is false. Life itself is intrinsically unsafe. The only totally safe world is a world without sentience - if all humans were dead, none of us could suffer. We all accept a degree of latent risk, and we accept more risk for more reward. There is no dichotomy, but a scale. Her argument rests on more egregious free speech somehow being caused by these innovations - except that only one line is used to explain why.

Second, attacks on safe spaces themselves intrude on personal liberties. Safe spaces rely on freedom of speech and association for their basis. They rely on the harm principle (that acts unharmful to others oughtn’t to be prohibited) to justify the unique restrictions they require. Most attacks on safe spaces have been principled - they claim that they are, by their very essence, dangerous. In doing so, they say that the bases of safe spaces - freedom of speech and association, are dangerous, and not as absolute as safe spaces would require. This is not a defence of free speech - it is a perversion of the idea that everyone ought to be able to say what they wish (unless violence is precipitated), in that it conflates freedom to say whatever one wishes to say with freedom to say whenever, however and wherever one wishes.

Third, trigger warnings are clearly not an attack on freedom of speech. A trigger warning looks like this: "We are now going to talk about genocide". It does not ban discussion of genocide. Indeed, it is conducive to the very discussion (that about challenging topics) that trigger warnings’ opponents claim to support. Students who do not wish to talk about traumatic topics probably won’t change whether they want to or not. The question is whether they are actually traumatised. Even if some of them are making their trauma up, a significant number clearly aren’t. They therefore gain a benefit, ie. the ability to prepare themselves for a challenging topic, from a costless statement. Those who benefit from trigger warnings say that often trigger warnings’ ability to prepare them means that they can now talk about topics which they previously couldn’t. Further, specific warning about when a topic is to be discussed as to a general warning that they will be discussed in a lecture means that some students turn up to those lectures in the first place. Even if this only occurs in a small number of circumstances, at worst, trigger warnings slightly increase discourse about challenging topics.

Moreover, attacking the permissibility of expressing oneself in this way is itself an authoritarian imposition. Forcing lecturers to shock rape victims by springing discussion of rape onto them is not only a violation of basic human decency - one ought to care about rape victims - but also a terrible idea from the point of view of freedom of speech, in that it is forcing people to say things.

Fourth, no-platforming is, very often, legitimate. That is to say that there is a legitimate debate as to whether or not an institution exists to promote broad public debate or for the benefit of its members. If an organisation falls into the latter category it is under no obligation to invite, or honour an invitation, to any given speaker. If, however, an organisation expressly exists to facilitate broad debate, the only legitimate reasons to prevent a speaker are those view-agnostic - they relate to the finity of resources available. If, as a byproduct, those speakers who represent a particular ideology are discriminated against by this method, so be it - this is an unintended consequence, and if an ideology is intrinsically something which means that those who host it have to use lots of resources to facilitate an unsound pseudo-intellectual set of statements, it’s probably not an ideology which ought to be promoted within the free speech paradigm, because it uses up finite resources. It’s obviously the case that a space claiming to exist for public discussion should not then discriminate against certain views, but not all institutions claim this as their sole goal.

Some institutions can also have both aims. They can wish to promote the wellbeing of their members and to promote general discourse. However, the three differences between speech and violence that have already been explained means that it is often very difficult to claim that the wellbeing of their members is in any way significantly impacted in the first place. If there is a much easier to see claim that freedom of speech and/or the quality of debate is decreased by not inviting a speaker, such institutions should prioritise the latter.

Moreover, it’s not clear that the distinctions drawn up indicate that hosting speakers in a view-agnostic way, even in an institution should be view-agnostic, is something so compulsory that any derogation from this should be prohibited. What is shown is that drawing such distinctions is wrong; it is not shown that those who go against this "should be expelled" - *Varsity*, *Why Tim Squirrell should be expelled* (November 22, 2014). Sometimes institutions slip up - their imperfections are not grounds to claim that they are entirely imperfect.

Fifth, a space can discriminate against a particular legitimate characteristic, eg. cogency of argument, and, as a result, because some ideologies are wrong, or are promoted in the wrong way, appear to be non view-agnostic. This form of incidental discrimination is still principally permissible, because it is not discriminating against the ideology *per se* - it discriminates against another characteristic. An example might be that racism is wrong, but if one wants a stunt double the stunt double probably should look similar to the person who is being copied. Similarly, if a space wishes for a minimum standard of debate, and, coincidentally, a particular ideology is unable to meet those minimum requirements as to how speech occurs, it is permissible that, in removing those who do not use the format specified, those from one group as opposed to another are removed.

This clarification is important, because this argument should not be taken as a denial of the very real struggles that those who have suffered face in dealing with their suffering, or an attack on self-definition and the creation of teleologically defined spaces.

### Changing discussion about free speech

The problem with many claims about free speech is that they rely on misconceptions or confusion. Opposition to safe spaces, trigger warnings and no-platforming relies on the mistaken equation of different types of spaces. Once free of the illusion that differentiation between different traumas is generally possible, many suggestions as to why certain forms of speech should be banned appear to be less attractive than they would otherwise. Yet most debate about free speech focuses on these questions. Without these assumptions, debate can escape its current primitive level.

A final confusion is this. Freedom of speech fundamentally protects many incorrect views. A large proportion of views expressed necessarily are going to be wrong because they are contradictory. That this is so means that the conflation of criticism and calls for censorship is also problematic. It enables another form of perverse restriction of debate, whereby those claiming to "defend" free speech actually pervert it.

Both sides of the political divide claim to support free speech. They claim to maximise free speech with their competing models thereof. Ultimately, however, if the only defence made of a view is "free speech", this indicates that the strongest thing that can be said for an argument is that the state should not restrict it. If this is equated with argument or analysis, truth itself is undervalued.

Truth matters. Even if we cannot find it, it’s still our duty to try. In showing that free speech should be significantly freer than conventionally suggested, it is also hoped that this is conducive to determining what is true. Discussion about the boundaries of what is permissible means that actual discussion - the aim of free speech - is omitted and ignored. This is not to say that debate about free speech is itself harmful, but rather that mentioning free speech in debates about entirely separate issues is unhelpful. Perhaps this is inevitable in a society in which much of public discourse has already been degraded to such a high degree, but its effects are so detrimental to the foundation of the liberal democracy that is crucial to securing our individual liberties and collective prosperity that we should nevertheless still resist it.
