#Crooke's *Resistance*

{"Author": "Joshua Loo", "Date": "4.9.17", "Category": "Review", "Tags": ("Islam","Dialectic","Alistair Crooke")}

Discourse about Islam often blithely assumes Islamic inferiority,
whether in overtly advocating its suppression or appeasement.
*Resistance*’s dual account of Islamic intellectual history from the
breaking up of the old Ottoman order to the modern structure of Hamas
and Hezbollah and the religious roots of the instrumental rationality of
Western orthodoxy is no less relevant today than they were at their
publication in 2009.

Crooke’s account of the imposition of westernisation is not particularly
novel, but it is written well enough, and is quite passable. His
critique of Western instrumental rationality, though somewhat incomplete
and lacking in philosophical depth, is far from inaccessible, and
contains a number of useful insights. Again, this account is not
completely novel, but it is still adequate.

The granting of equal status to Islamist ideology enables an interesting
and perhaps novel comparison with the Western intellectual canon. The
book shines when it questions the distinction often drawn between
Western intervention and Islamist jihad. Its praise of Islamism as an
open ideology, and the distinction drawn in action and philosophy
between the eschatology of Al Qaida and the “emancipatory resistance” of
Hamas and Hezbollah is another highlight. *Resistance* contrasts this
with the religious roots of Western just war theory.

The book is moderately well written. It has a relatively wide frame of
reference, as would be expected of a book with its thesis. Occasionally
it is a little difficult to follow due to unintuitive sentence
structure, but that itself is no major crime. Although accessibly
written, it has not obviously reduced the complexity of the ideas that
it presents.

However, Crooke ignores a number of issues which would complete and
round his account. Though Western ideology may have its flaws as he
posits, he ignores a number of problematic views and actions in these
groups. Consider that Hamas’s 1988 charter, which is still in force,
mentions a “struggle against the Jews” and approvingly quotes:

> “The Day of Judgement will not come about until Moslems fight the Jews
> (killing the Jews), when the Jew will hide behind stones and trees.
> The stones and trees will say O Moslems, O Abdulla, there is a Jew
> behind me, come and kill him. Only the Gharkad tree, (evidently a
> certain kind of tree) would not do that because it is one of the trees
> of the Jews.”[^1]

Any attempt to legitimise such movements must also account for this.

The Middle East Media Research Institute, an organisation which has been
accused of deliberate mistranslation or misleading translation in the
past, but whose translations are rarely completely incorrect, reported
that the Secretary-General of Hezbollah declared that homosexual
relationships were “contrary to logic, human nature and the human
mind”[^2].

These issues may not be as large has is otherwise suggested, but they
still ought to have been addressed.

Nevertheless, it is still well worth reading.

*Resistance: the essence of the Islamist revolution* is available in the
library, or will be when the Editor has returned it.

[^1]: http://avalon.law.yale.edu/20th\_century/hamas.asp

[^2]: https://www.memri.org/tv/hizbullah-sec-gen-nasrallah-warns-against-legalization-gay-marriage-lebanon-defends-early/transcript
