#**Middle East Society:** **Christopher de Bellaigue** on *The Islamic Enlightenment*

{"Author": "Joshua Loo", "Date": "28.4.17", "Category": "Review", "Tags": ("Christopher de Bellaigue", "Literature")}

Claims that one has located the "Islamic Enlightenment", that “the” Islamic Enlightenment is a useful concept or other broad claims of religious equivalence are often highly intellectually questionable, more the product of an inflated sense of academic worth than real inquiry. De Bellaigue makes a somewhat different claim - one which partly inoculated his work to this ailment, which was that the period before the Great War marked a period of intellectual flourishing within the Ottoman and Persian Empires.

De Bellaigue career has been marked by his relatively constant journalistic contributions, but also a notable incident in 2001. *The Economist*’s Istanbul correspondent, De Bellaigue thought himself somewhat knowledgeable about the history of Anatolia. Yet, moments after the publication of his essay on Turkish historiography in the *New York Review of Books*, he was swamped with complaints. The self-confident Cantabrigian had, whether on purpose or by accident, referred to the Armenian genocide as a series of deportations and massacres of half a million - strange phrasing, which understates the real number of deaths visited upon the Armenians by two thirds.

Perhaps more curious is his ostensibly admirable response - the writing of his book *Rebel Land: Unraveling the Riddle of History in a Turkish Town*. Yet at no point can one escape the sensation that there is something wrong - there is something wrong when someone who is by all accounts relatively well informed nearly denies the Armenian genocide, and there is something wrong when he refers to "the Armenian lobby", as if asking for recognition of the genocide of one’s people is the same as Saudi lobbying for American arms to bomb Yemenis, or when he refers to the “Kurdish lobby”, equating seeking self-determination and not being gassed by Ba’athists with attempts to increase oil sales. Perhaps he has redeemed himself - he has penned many “Long Reads” in *The Guardian*’s noble attempt to reverse journalistic degeneration - but an ugly taste lingers. This is not to suggest that he is secretly a conspiracy theorist, though his actions do not particularly preclude that, but rather that he has a certain intellectual carelessness.

De Bellaigue broadly claimed that the Islamic world experienced a massive shift, politically, economically, socially and scientifically, after the French invasion of Egypt, and the accompanying shock this caused. This shift was in some places surprisingly deep, and by the end of the twentieth century he posits that the Middle East had undergone a revolution not dissimilar to one that Europe too had undergone. The Great War shattered and reversed this liberalising force, which first, in some countries, replaced with an authoritarian brand of liberalisation, and finally by old-style Islamism.

Sociopolitically, De Bellaigue suggests that there was huge liberalising force which meant that the upper class who in 1800 would not have dreamed of educating girls by 1900 viewed their education as a social necessity, lest they be seen as parochial, and that constitutionalist ideas first found their way into these regions in this period. De Beillaigue pointed to attempts at constitutional governance in the Ottoman Empire and the fashionability of discussion of modern ideas like evolution within the rapidly growing middle class.

Scientifically and economically, De Bellaigue notes the creation of vast systems of infrastructure throughout the Ottoman Empire - the rapid expansion of its economy, its industrialisation and the creation of infrastructure which, even to this day, has in some places not been replaced. In 1800 there were no trains, there was no postal system and almost no women could not read - in 1900 the opposite was true. These two broad categories of development fueled each other - sociopolitical upheaval imported new technologies, which broadened the middle class, causing more sociopolitical upheaval.

There is a tension within his case, which is that while he claims that this revolution was deep and expansive, it was also "superficial", as he said of changes to Iran pre-1979, in light of the speed of Islamisation post-1979. He relatively cogently resolves this, by claiming that some relatively conservative modernisers only accepted the useful bits of modernity, like medicine, while jettisoning other aspects of modernity. This is critical in reconciling the speed of counter-revolution and his case that some aspects of change were particularly deep.

This cogency evaporates - before, he claims that much of the scale of this revolution was due to the coherence of modernity - bringing in industrialists also brings in new ideas, and sending students abroad to learn of artillery-making teaches them of constitutionalism - but then claims that modernity’s separation caused different levels of permeation into these societies. This claim is crucial for much of his case in terms of the overall depth of revolution. If it were really this simple to separate different aspects of modernity, why were so many different aspects of modernity supposedly accepted in the 19th century, as he claims?

We are therefore faced with a choice of accepting either his explanation of what he claims to be an exceptionally broad revolution in the 19th and early 20th centuries, which has problems in explaining the speed of the counter-revolution, or that there was more superficial change in the 19th and 20th centuries, which chimes in with the speed of Islamisation in the later part of the 20th century but not so much with his original thesis.

De Bellaigue reasonably successfully posits that some form of comprehensive change swept through the Middle East during the 19th and early 20th century. What he fails to do is clearly define his vision of it - on the one hand, limited to medicine and technology, on the other hand broad and expansive - which is, perhaps, the more intellectually stimulating part of this exercise. What we are left with is the insight that much change took place in 19th Century Ottoman territories, an insight important and underappreciated but nevertheless not particularly unique or incisive.
