# Reality *may* not be what it seems: **Lee Smolin**'s *The Trouble with Physics*

{"Author": "Isky Mathews", "Category": "Review", "Date": "25.5.17", "Tags": ("Physics", "String theory", "Sciences and Mathematics")}

In 1905, Albert Einstein wrote three immensely influential papers: one
showing irrefutably the existence of the atom and its rough size, one
outlining Special Relativity and another introducing the concept of
*energy quanta* to explain the photo-electric effect. Each of these were
so powerful not just because they solved long standing problems but the
implementation created *testable predictions* of previously unobserved
phenomena and also brought great paradigm shifts conceptually: General
Relativity showed us that space’s geometry was not *flat* and Quantum
Theory demonstrated great abilities to predict particle interactions and
showed us that the universe is fundamentally in some way probabilistic.
It is the reconciliation of the last two theories in a theory that once
again brings new testable predictions and new ideas to which Lee Smolin,
a physicist currently working on quantum gravity at the *Perimeter
Institute for Theoretical Physics*, devoted his 2006 book *The Trouble
With Physics.*

Quantum Theory and the models we have derived from it have been the most
successful physical theories ever: as Smolin points out, there have been
no experiments in the last 37 years which have done anything but confirm
the Standard Model of particle physics and if one discounts the
discovery that neutrinos have mass, a small but surprising revelation,
much longer than that. Smolin wrote his book worried that a whole
generation of physicists may have wasted their lives working on
something doomed to produce fewer and fewer meaningful results – *String
Theory*. As he sees it, there are five great problems in physics today:

-   To combine General Relativity and Quantum Mechanics into a complete
    theory of nature. (the Problem of Quantum Gravity)

-   To resolve the problems in the foundations of Quantum Mechanics,
    either by making sense of the theory as it stands or by inventing a
    new theory that does make sense.

-   To determine whether the various particles and forces can be unified
    in a theory that explains them all as manifestations of a single,
    fundamental entity.

-   To explain how the values of the free constants in the Standard
    Model of particle physics are chosen in nature.

-   To explain dark matter and dark energy. Or, if they don’t exist, to
    determine how and why gravity is modified on large scales. More
    generally, explain why the constants of the Standard Model of
    Cosmology, including dark energy, have the values that they do.

Smolin states that back in the 1970s, when a few outcast physicists were
working on a succession to Kaluza-Klein Theory (the first attempt at
augmenting relativity to include electromagnetism) worked out that
mathematical objects called “*strings*” can be made to propagate using
the simple law of minimising area, leading to quantised frequencies at
which they vibrate. These frequencies were found to correspond with the
particles in the Standard Model (even originally the graviton featured
as a *gravity-carrying boson*), changing such individuals as *Edward
Witten* from obscurity into the physics world’s celebrities. This
already solved one of the five problems stated above and potentially had
something to say about quantum gravity but as the theory was studied in
more depth, serious and cavernous problems became apparent.

In this book, Smolin takes you through the history of the world’s most
studied physics theory, from the First Superstring Revolution to Edward
Witten’s conference conjecture of M-Theory to the great Maldacena
Conjecture. He shows clearly why something which he and a generation of
others once had so much faith in has failed to live up to its creators’
expectations and why perhaps it is tentative now to even call it a
theory, as there are no generally accepted proposals about what the main
principles of the theory are nor what the main equations are, nor any
proof that they could exist.

In fact, the problem, as he demonstrates, may be far deeper than String
Theory but rather in the *celebrity culture* it breeds, a tremendously
self-confident establishment with an unusually monolithic community
which members describe in terms similar to religion and seem to agree on
myriad concepts with a strong sense of consensus whether driven by the
evidence or not. More than a revision of theory but a revision of the
structure of the entire theoretical physics field may be necessary.

*The Trouble with Physics* is a book for those truly keen on theoretical
physics but despite their best efforts, have yet to understand all the
mathematics. Despite never showing a single equation, Smolin goes into
great depth on the web of concepts and it partners very well with other
books in the genre, such as Carlo Rovelli’s *Reality Is Not What It
Seems* and Penrose’s *Faith, Fashion and Fantasy in the new physics of
the Modern Age*, truly showing you where they brush dirt under the
carpet and explain things overly optimistically. Smolin applies the
ultimate sceptical lens, critiquing everything, even his own work and
life. He admits that he was a String Theorist for some time but during
his university years, he says “my friends and I would never have guessed
that we were living through the last days of theoretical physics as we
knew it.”

If you’re particularly intrigued from a technical perspective, the book
contains explanations of: branes & strings, the Maldacena conjecture,
M-Theory, S-Duality & other dualities, gauge theories, Doubly Special
Relativity, spontaneous symmetry breaking, supersymmetry, the
Hawking-Entropy Paradox, Kaluza-Klein Theory, Loop Quantum Gravity and
much more. Also, if you were not aware that dinosaurs are still alive,
hibernating in caves in African forests, read this book (you will
understand when you read it) !

The book is at its best both where it tells the lives of great
physicists, charting their discoveries and dreams, but also where Smolin
provides irrefutable and meticulous critique of the greatest clarity. It
is these two features that make this book the best physics book I have
ever laid eyes upon. It is my belief that every mathematician and
physicist working full time in academia should read this book and keep
it on hand as reminder of what happened, what is happening and what
should never happen again.
