# **History Society:** **Benedict Mee** on "Ruling the Seas: Pirates and Roman expansionism"

{"Author": "Jonny Heywood", "Date": "28.4.17", "Category": "Review", "Tags": ("Romans", "Piracy")}

The turnout was more than a little surprising. Given Ian Duncan-Smith’s talk on ‘Social Justice and Europe’, that 20 people attended was something of a surprise.

Benedict first spoke of the level and importance of piracy during Roman times, talking of the centrality of sea trade to the Roman economy and the ease with which pirates concealed themselves along the rocky Mediterranean shores. A Roman delegation was sent to secure trade interests in the Kingdom of Illyria, but irritated the Queen, who ordered pirates to attack the diplomats’ ship. Indeed, he told us, pirates were often used as weapons of war, like in the Punic Wars, when both sides employed corsairs to fight, and attack enemy ships and towns. We underestimate the scale of piracy at the time. Piracy was an economic imperative along much of the Mediterranean coast, a constant threat to shipping and coastal settlements.

Second, he opined that piracy was a crucial part of Roman justification for imperialism. Pompey’s war on pirates established Rome's place as the 'defensive imperialist', protector of the Mediterranean. In Illyria, Rome used the pirate attack to justify invasion and annexation. After we moved to questions, the conversation shifted from piracy to Roman psychology. It was asked why Rome felt the need to justify its imperialism with piracy. In the same way Blair and Bush did before the Iraq war, the Republic sought the moral high ground, by asserting victimhood. The moral high ground was important both politically and diplomatically, as it is today.

Piracy, as we heard, is a little touched on area of ancient history, but one with significant weight; the talk was surprisingly well-attended, but unsurprisingly very well received.
