# What happens if there is a hung parliament?

{"Author": "Jonny Heywood", "Category": "Dialectic", "Date": "25.5.17", "Tags": ("General Election", "Jeremy Corbyn")}

A few days ago, YouGov shook the political world by releasing a forecast for seats one by each party, today this [model](https://yougov.co.uk/uk-general-election-2017) forecasts Labour on 257, but crucially the Conservatives on 313. Whilst obviously polls can be inaccurate, and YouGov in particular is known to use a polling model more friendly to Labour, taking this tool at face value, we might well be looking at a hung parliament on Friday – and so we have to begin considering what could happen, come June 9th, if we are left with a hung parliament.

The first, most obvious question is that of coalition. Because Sinn Féin's MPs (projected to number 5) refuse to turn up in Parliament and the speaker is neutral, 324 seats are normally sufficient for a working majority. So, on that poll earlier, Theresa May needs 11 more MPs; those would probably come from the Democratic Unionist and Ulster Unionist Parties (DUP and UUP), who often align themselves with the Tories anyway.

It is, however, not as clear cut as that. First, as a party similar to but smaller than the DUP, the UUP need, for their own survival, to be different. At a campaign event, the leader of the UUP, for example, spoke of the need to move beyond the DUP-SF binary, and it’s no surprise that they attack the DUP for incompetence and historic nepotism, given that most of their votes come from would-be DUP voters. Going into a coalition with the DUP and the Conservatives would therefore harm the UUP as a party, and even a de facto coalition could cause them to be construed by rivals like the Alliance Party as being a DUP doppelganger.

Second, both made pledges before the 2017 assembly elections to remain in the single market, directly at odds with Theresa May who has (mostly) advocated a hard break with the EU. For the UUP in particular, being a more moderate version of the right-wing DUP, reneging on this promise is unlikely to go down well. Northern Ireland was a majority remain country, so for both parties, enabling Brexit by giving Theresa May her majority might well harm them. Even voting with her on a hard Brexit without being in a formal coalition could harm their support.

Closely linked is the question of the border with Ireland. It's not clear how a Single Market external border can be soft. Theresa May’s attitude towards Brexit negotiation, of being firm has drawn not just laughter but hostility as well from the EU27. Her voter coalition is made up of not only well-off long time Conservatives and traditionalists but also former UKIP voters who have been promised a wonderful deal with no concessions to the EU, and her pledges not to pay them huge amounts of money and to leave negotiations if, as is quite likely, they go badly, means that getting a proper deal could be hard. For the DUP and UUP, that means Theresa May could well leave Northern Ireland with the dreaded hard border with Ireland that almost all of Stormont unquestionably opposes. If, by refusing to make concessions, or even from walking out on a deal to please her voters and to look strong and stable, Theresa May creates that border wall, the DUP and the UUP could have their support decimated. The UUP would likely abandon Theresa May in hope of picking up DUP votes if it goes badly; for the DUP, it would likely cede their position as biggest party in Stormont to Sinn Féin, who would be bolstered by the fury invoked. One risk too far?

The alternative for the Conservatives, indeed, the only alternative if the polls converge further, is the Liberal Democrats, but again, Brexit seems to be the big impediment. The Lib Dems will probably get between 5 and 15 seats, almost all of which, given the nature of their campaign, will have been won on a vigourous campaign against soft Brexit. Like in 2015, their voters would abandon them but even more so given they would enable the Brexit they have singularly framed their campaign against. It is very unlikely that Tim Farron would effectively doom his party by joining that coalition, and so in the event of a hung parliament. Hence the most likely option is a Unionist coalition or a minority government.

It is therefore possible that Theresa May might soften on Brexit if there is a hung parliament, either to win votes from Labour MPs on the final Brexit bill in a minority government, or as a deal with the DUP and/or UUP. It will be very hard for her though – the backbenchers who are driving the hard Brexit break could well vote ‘no deal’ or try and spark a leadership contest, and she would be punished at the polls whenever she chooses to call the next election by voters attracted by hard Brexit.

The question of leadership after the election is important too. She (claimed to have) called this election 6 weeks ago to increase her mandate and strengthen her negotiating position. Already large parts of the Conservative party are denouncing her campaign as shambolic, and it isn’t hard to imagine her being booted out like Margaret Thatcher if she comes home with fewer MPs.

It’s often said that the Conservative party has 3 wings, the traditionalists, who are fuelling hard Brexit with their nationalistic and socially conservative views; the Thatcherites, or the free-marketers, from whom Cameron and Osborne came, and the one-nation Tories, of whom Theresa May and her innermost circle, her chiefs of staff, come from, believing in the welfare state whilst advocating family values and patriotism.

Any coup against her would be led by the Thatcherite wing. Opposing her manifesto of increased spending, and despairing as she refuses to rule out tax rises, the Thatcherites would loath to see this manifesto in action. They’d need support also from the Brexiteering ends of the party – from people like Jacob Rees-Mogg, or Sir Nicholas Soames, seen as the aristocratic side of the party, so a Cameron devotee would not do.

Such people do exist however – David Davis is a self-professed libertarian, a member of No Turning Back, a Thatcherite pressure group, and obviously a Brexiteer. Liam Fox is on the council of Conservative Way Forward, another Thatcherite pressure group which has had huge amounts of influence over party leadership in the last quarter of a century. He is also a Brexiteer, and has run for leadership in the past; evidently he has his eyes on the prize. There is Michael Fallon, whose role as Defence secretary for many years will have won him admiration and respect from the patriots and also the one-nation he has worked with, and is also a member of No Turning Back. Finally, as ever there is Boris Johnson, Foreign Secretary, Brexiteer darling, and popular with the membership.

Theresa May’s hold over the Conservative party is far from secure, and in the calamity that in a hung parliament this election will have been for the Tory party, Theresa May’s head would be the first on the line. Not only that, but a hung parliament could drastically change the shape of Brexit, and maybe, just maybe, it could lead to a coalition of chaos. One can only hope.
